---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "E1: UI Basics Technical Blog"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-01-30
published: true
labels:
  - Perspective
  - My Experience
  - WOD's
---

When I initially started working on WOD 1, I had a difficult time getting my server to run in my “ITM352_Repo” folder. While doing this, it was challenging to figure out how to access the newly made HTML file. I asked my cousin (who is a CS major) to help me through the process, guiding me on which file path to input into the URL. Once I accessed my newly created HTML file, completing step 1 was easy due to my basic knowledge of HTML. However, step 2 was a bit harder because I hadn’t edited an HTML document in a month, forgetting some basics like the insertion of paragraph tags within the body elements. After relearning the basic structure of HTML, I successfully pasted all the given text within the body tag.

When attempting to add hyperlinks to specific words in each paragraph, I reached 25 minutes. As stated in the instructions, if you reach the DNF limit on your first attempt, you should watch the video to guide you through the rest of the assignment. After doing so, I completed the rest of the assignment on my second attempt, reaching a completion time of 22 minutes (Sd) with a bit of struggle at the end.

WOD 2, in comparison to WOD 1, was significantly easier. I completed the assignment on my third attempt with a performance of Rx. To make this process a little easier, I typed a list of steps in my notes, referring to it whenever I forgot a step. On the first attempt, I spent about 18 minutes figuring out the CSS format. On the second try, I did the assignment while following the given video as a guide to correct any mistakes from my first attempt. After this, I easily went through all the steps on my third attempt.

WOD 3 was also much easier than the first WOD but a bit more challenging compared to WOD 2. My first attempt took over the DNF time limit because I had to look up the different functions of linking the CSS to the HTML and correcting the given format to the target format. As I did in the second WOD, I stopped the timer and completed the instructions while following the given video. This helped me a lot because I couldn’t figure out the specific formatting for making the three columns level with each other (fixed by adding padding). After completing it the second time with the video, I finished it within 6 minutes on my third attempt, with everything working flawlessly!

One piece of advice I would give to future ITM 352 students is to write a comprehensive document with all the functions for the different programs used within this course so that it is easily retrievable. Another tip I learned was to write down steps to help guide you when recording the screencast so you don’t waste time if you forget a specific step.
