---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "E3: Preparing for WODs Technical Essay"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-02-17
published: true
labels:
  - Perspective
  - My Experience
  - WOD's
---

In this WOD, the task was to make a create a chart that lists the item name, quantity, price, extended price, sub total of the all the products, and the total including tax. This seems pretty simple, but the only caveat for this is that you have to integrate specific strings in order to display the specified item of the list. This is done in order to help students grasp a better understanding and applying javascript to an HTML file, rather than hard coding it into the file. 

Here is a detailed overview of the assignment : https://dport96.github.io/ITM352/morea/060.expressions-operators/experience-invoice1.html

This WOD was particularly difficult for me in all honesty. For my first attempt, I had gone past the DNF time limit (40 minutes) but I decided to continue past the limit. In the instructions for the previous WOD'S, it tells you that you should stop once you DNF-ed but I still continued until I had finished. This in total, this took me over 2 hours to complete when trying to figure out the strings to input. After the first attempt I made, I watched the video and then typed out a list of steps to do within that video which makes this assignment significantly easier to complete. This is something I have started implementing since the second WOD assignment. When I had finished this the second time, I completed this assignment within 22 minutes with some mistakes that I had to review during the recording. One thing that I could've done better to prepare for this assignment was to review the slides with all the information. 
