---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "E4: Reflecting On My Experience Developing Basic Javascript Programs"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-04-16
published: true
labels:
  - Javascript
  - Class Improvement
  - Assignment 1
---

My programming skills have improved with the basics of Javascript including expressions and operators, dynamic web pages, and variables. Though, I do need to improve my understanding of the algorithms, HTML forms, and server side processing. For the usage of screencasts, I feel like I learned more with the screencasts because I actually wasn’t able to complete a lot of the WODS without asking for help. Of course, I tried using ChatGPT, but it can only do so much to provide me with insights on how to complete the given tasks. These WOD’s were very challenging for me. Same thing goes for the labs that weren't able to complete them with confidence.

I think this class could be improved by minimizing unnecessary dialogue from the Professor to encourage ample time to finish in class labs. There were multiple times where we would stay later than the scheduled ending times. Another thing that would greatly improve the quality of this class is to consistently convey the correct information regarding due dates of assignments and labs. There were numerous events regarding this where a student had to ask the professor for the correct due date because there were different due dates being said in the Discord server and in Laulima. Regarding the class website, I believe that the overall structure of if it was good but the different modules and labs would not align. For reference, our lab 9 is in module 8 which would always confuse me when trying to find the assignment instructions. An additional minor conflict I had with the class website were the links of readings opening in the same tab as the website. This is a minor inconvenience, but I think that it could be a great quality of life change for the links to open in a new tab!

I believe the thing that helped me the most for assignments was the use of ChatGPT to explain specific lines of code that I was unfamiliar with.

Another thing that was an amazing tool was the utilization of screencasts to record the whole class lecture. During the end of March 2024, my mom got really sick which left our family owned business to a standstill. Because of this, I had to skip some of my classes in order to keep the business in operation. Being able to use the screen casts to compensate for the classes that I skipped was extremely beneficial for my circumstance.
