---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Settler Colonialism In The USA"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2022-011-08
published: true
labels:
  - English
---

Many people think of the United States as “one of the wealthiest countries to live in” but what’s less highlighted is its dark past and the actions it took to achieve that status. Settler colonization has been a common occurrence throughout the history of the U.S. and has affected the lives of millions around the world. Settler colonialism is the eradication and erasure of Indigenous peoples to appropriate the land for perpetual usage by foreign people. In many cases, this may be done to increase global power, boost the economy, and even exploit free labor within the indigenous society (Kashyap 2020, 2). Although this may not seem possible, the only way to get rid of this perpetuating ideology of colonialism is to completely rid the people who are not of indigenous blood of the land they and their ancestors have stolen. During the many years of establishing order in the United States of America, there have been many questionable actions taken by the government such as the deculturation of the Native Americans, the illegal annexation of Hawaii, and unjustly engaging in the Vietnam war.
	One of the earliest instances of colonization within the North American continent was the arrival of Christopher Colombus and his crew in the year 1492 who had originated in Italy. Columbus discovered a territory with around two million inhabitants that had previously been unknown to Europeans. He mistook these individuals for Indians because he assumed he had discovered a new path to the East in the Indies (Travis 2021). What he didn’t realize was that he had come upon the unknown continent of North America, inhabited by the Native American tribes. European nations then proceeded to colonize the Americas throughout the following few centuries, seeking fresh territory and potential economic trading possibilities. Other European colonial powers, especially English explorers, focused on building colonies in North America, while the Spanish and Portuguese colonized major sections of South America (Travis 2021). In regards to those tribes, I am going to further expand upon the negative aspects of colonization within the Choctaw nation derived from present-day Mississippi and some parts of Alabama (Peter 2022). With the surge of American colonists arriving in the South, the Native Americans were quickly driven from their hometowns, by treaties, political manipulation, and sometimes through force. The Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek was the last in a series of treaties that surrendered Choctaw territory to the United States. The Choctaw had developed trading links with European immigrants encroaching on their land by the early 18th century, offering them agricultural goods and animals through trade (Peter 2022). As a result, the Choctaw built a robust economy, and their land holdings were substantial throughout the 18th century (Peter 2022). However, with the foundation of the United States, the new nation began to strive toward obtaining more territory for colonization and defensive needs. Following the “formation of the Mississippi Territory” in 1798 and the election of Thomas Jefferson to the United States presidency in 1800, President Jefferson deemed it strategically necessary for the federal government to acquire all lands bordering the east side of the Mississippi River to defend against France, Spain, and England” (Peter 2022). Through the Treaty of Fort Adams in 1801, the Choctaw surrendered to the United States 2,641,920 acres of territory from the Yazoo River to the thirty-first parallel. Between 1801 and 1830, when the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek was signed, the Choctaw relinquished more than 23 million acres to the United States (Navarro 2013). Choctaw leaders were forced to trade portions of their homelands east of the Tombigbee River in 1816 and were required to give up even more of their properties by 1820. As a result of this exchange, many Choctaws relocated to Oklahoma and Arkansas (Peter 2022). A southern congressman brought the Indian Removal Act into Congress in May of 1829 (Navarro 2013). It included tribes from the southeastern United States such as the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Creek, Seminole, and Choctaw. Dozens of petitions were delivered to Washington, D.C., saying that the conduct was unethical, damaging, and unconstitutional. After much discussion, President Andrew Jackson and the United States Congress signed the Indian Removal Act, causing the Choctaw and other tribes to abandon their homelands and relocate westward (Navarro 2013). They marched for more than four months, ill-equipped, alongside wagon caravans, throughout blizzards and brutal winter weather (Manning 2020). Their various routes totaled around 1,000 miles, passing through Tennessee, Kentucky, Illinois, Missouri, and Arkansas. Others followed the Tennessee, Ohio, Mississippi, and Arkansas rivers until they reached the eastern border of modern-day Oklahoma. The native population suffered greatly as a result of the European colonization of North America. Their way of life was irreversibly altered in a short amount of time. A variety of circumstances contributed to the devastating changes, including land loss, sickness, enforcing laws that contradicted their culture, and much more. Funerals and burials were held at each point along the path becoming known as the infamous “Trail of Tears” (Manning 2020). Out of a population of more than 16,000, the death toll from internment camps, migration, and its aftermath surpassed 4,000 deaths (Manning 2020). They perished as a result of exposure to the elements of starvation, numerous illnesses, and exhaustion. But this is not the last atrocity that the Native Americans would face at the hands of the U.S.They also allowed the usage of boarding schools for the Native Americans during the mid-19th century. Indian boarding schools were established to replace traditional Native American ways of living with modern American culture. Many of them were established by either the government or Christian missionaries (Anderson 2019). Many Native American families were first forced to send their children to boarding schools by the government and later were given no other options (Anderson 2019). Native American children were subjected to cultural genocide as a result of these boarding schools, forcing their children to unlearn and reject thousands of years of traditions and customs. The history of the many Native American tribes that had once thrived for centuries, were subjugated to disease, war, and a loss of culture which effectively destroyed their society. Although these tragic events occurred, there are still many U.S. Indian Reservations today intending to preserve the traditions and knowledge that was hunted down by the United States.
Moving forward, the illegal annexation of Hawaii was another prime example of settler colonialism throughout U.S. history. The discovery of Hawaii came to be one of the most important areas for economic and political growth for the U.S. military. It acted as a resting area for tired boats and sailors traveling across the pacific ocean which made it enticing for active military looking to control the pacific. The first event that started the colonization of Hawaii was when a British voyager named Captain James Cook visited the chain of islands in the year 1778 (Thompson 2014). He and his crew had managed to sail across half of the world in an attempt to discover new uncharted lands for Britain. After discovering the resource-enriched lands of Hawaii, Cook was murdered not long after in a conflict that also killed several Native Hawaiians. His crew brought the late captain’s discovery back to the people of Britain (Thompson 2014). With this newfound knowledge, more and more people from the mainland began to travel to Hawaii for various reasons such as extracting and trading resources and spreading religious beliefs to the natives. In doing so, the Europeans introduced contagious illnesses that wiped off a large number of the native population (Thompson 2014). Before the world knew of Hawaii’s existence in 1778, the Hawaiian Islands' population was estimated to be between 300,000 and 683,000 people (Lau 2015). According to the U.S. census, the number of Native Hawaiians had dropped to 24,000 by 1920 due to the diseases the Hawaiians were not adapted to face (Lau 2015). Skipping forward, to around 1893, the Kingdom of Hawaii was recognized as an individual nation throughout the world. Hawaii was ruled by a constitutional monarchy with Queen Lili'uokalani at the forefront, leading the nation. However, that year, a group of rich American businessmen conducted a coup, destabilizing Queen Lili'uokalani's administration and forming their own "provisional government." Grover Cleveland, the president of the United States at the time, denounced the coup but did not push the newly formed provisional government to return power to the Hawaiian monarchy. Following the coup’s overthrow of Queen Lili'uokalani, Native Hawaiians banded together in an attempt to petition and persuade the U.S. administration to restore the power to the monarchy. However, in 1898, the Spanish American War had just begun, making Hawaii vital to the U.S. as a naval base and refueling station (Lau 2015). That year, Congress enacted legislation, illegally annexing Hawaii as a U.S. territory to secure their advantage in the war. The U.S. government arranged a poll in Hawaii in 1959 to determine whether the territory should become a state of the U.S. This measure was made in part to prevent Native Hawaiians from declaring independence and denying their right to sovereignty. The poll was successful, and Hawaii became the 50th state in the United States that same year (Lau 2015). However, many people question the authenticity of this vote. There were just two alternatives on the ballot: whether Hawaii should remain a U.S. territory or become a U.S. state. It was not possible to vote for Hawaii’s independence (Lau 2015). The worst part of this voting ballot was during the period it was held, white settlers and military personnel significantly outnumbered Native Hawaiians which drastically altered the votes in favor of Hawaii becoming the 50th state of America.
One of the more recent cases of settler colonialism pertaining to America would be the involvement of the U.S. military in the Vietnam war from the years 1964 to1975 (America’s Wars 2021). To put a short overview, between 1945 to 1954, the Vietnamese fought an anti-colonial war against France, which received $2.6 billion in financial assistance from the U.S. Following the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu, a peace conference was held in Geneva. The meeting resulted in the independence of Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam, which was briefly divided between an anti-Communist South and a Communist North (Kaust, 2016). The United States was concerned that communism would expand to South Vietnam and subsequently the rest of Asia. They opted to assist the South Vietnamese government by sending money, supplies, and military advisers. In doing so over 58,220 U.S. citizens died with an estimated 2 million total casualties within the span of the war (Kass 2016). The South Vietnamese landscape was lush and green before the Vietnam War. Farmers cultivated rice paddies (wet rice fields) in lush river valleys (Shiro 2022). The nearby slopes were covered by forests with trees and vegetation. When American soldiers arrived in 1965, they discovered that the forests were great hiding areas for Communist guerilla combatants known as the Viet Cong. They also recognized that the rice paddies and rural communities might provide the Viet Cong with food and supplies. For several years, the United States military blasted the South Vietnamese countryside with planes and heavy artillery to eradicate these sources of support for the enemy. The bombing was responsible for much of the death and devastation in the war. Throughout the Vietnam War, the United States military used almost 14 million tons of explosives, largely in the South Vietnamese countryside (Shiro 2022). This means that American planes dropped more than twice as many bombs as U.S. troops used during WWII all over an area roughly the size of California (Shiro 2022). During the conflict, the U.S. military also sprayed millions of gallons of defoliants which refer to chemical agents that damaged or burnt crops, woods, and other vegetation on South Vietnamese territory (Shiro 2022). The massive devastation of farms and communities in South Vietnam's countryside displaced a large number of locals. Many of these individuals went to cities, where they found work in whatever manner they could, including illicit operations (Shiro 2022). The poverty and desperation of the war years, along with American influence, resulted in significant changes in Vietnamese families, culture, and society. During this time, Vietnam had already undergone the process of colonization from other countries but the actions that the U.S. had committed had severely crippled both their enemies in the North and allies in the South.
These events and examples of American settler colonialism are not just things that happened in the distant past nor have they been conducted by people the population no longer identifies with. Colonialism is here and now and the effects of these atrocities can still be felt to this day. People are still fighting for their right to the land that was stolen from them and still trying to rebuild the culture that was destroyed. And to this day, some people may argue that “the new property of America is better off for economic reasons,”, but that does not excuse the bloodstained trail that America took to get there. Disease, stolen land, broken cultures; all of these aspects and more are what the United States used to leverage their advantage against these people. And still, to this day, America continues its rampage of colonial ideologies in numerous other places such as Samoa, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam, and many others. If history is correct in repeating itself, these will not be the last victims of the destructive effects of American settler colonialism.

References
“America's Wars.” Department of Veterans Affairs, May 2021. https://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/fs_americas_wars.pdf.
Anderson, Melanie. “Chapter 3: Boarding Schools: Native Words, Native Warriors.” Native Words, Native Warriors - National Museum of the American Indian, 2019. https://americanindian.si.edu/nk360/code-talkers/boarding-schools/#:~:text=The%20Boarding%20School%20Tragedy,-Play%20Narration%20Your&text=Indian%20boarding%20schools%20were%20founded,the%20government%20or%20Christian%20missionaries.
Kashyap, Monika Batra, G. Alex Sinha and Janani Umamaheswar, David B. Oppenheimer, Gregory M. Stein, and Hiep Nguyen. “U.S. Settler Colonialism, White Supremacy, and the Racially Disparate Impacts of Covid-19.” California Law Review, November 23, 2020. https://www.californialawreview.org/settler-colonialism-white-supremacy-covid-19/.
Kass, Mina. “Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualty Statistics.” National Archives and Records Administration. National Archives and Records Administration, December 9, 2016. https://www.archives.gov/research/military/vietnam-war/casualty-statistics#:~:text=April%2029%2C%202008.-,The%20Vietnam%20Conflict%20Extract%20Data%20File%20of%20the%20Defense%20Casualty,casualties%20of%20the%20Vietnam%20War.
Kaust, Daniel. “Reasons for US Involvement in Vietnam - the Vietnam War - National 5 History Revision - BBC Bitesize.” BBC News. BBC, 2016. https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zv7bkqt/revision/2#:~:text=China%20had%20become%20communist%20in,help%20the%20South%20Vietnamese%20Government.
Lau, Kevin. “Handout Hawaii’s Legacy of Colonialism - Facing History and Ourselves.” Facing History And Ourselves, April 23, 2015. https://www.facinghistory.org/sites/default/files/Hawaiis_Legacy_of_Colonialism.pdf.
Manning, Joseph. “What Happened on the Trail of Tears?” National Parks Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, May 26, 2020. https://www.nps.gov/trte/learn/historyculture/what-happened-on-the-trail-of-tears.htm.
Morris, Amanda. “What Is Settler-Colonialism?” Learning for Justice, January 22, 2019. https://www.learningforjustice.org/magazine/what-is-settlercolonialism.
Navarro, Meghan A. “Signing of the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek.” National Postal Museum, October 26, 2013.https://postalmuseum.si.edu/exhibition/indians-at-the-post-office-murals-treaties/signing-of-the-treaty-of-dancing-rabbit-creek.
Peter, Mark. “Early Choctaw History.” National Parks Service. U.S. Department of the Interior, February 16, 2022. https://www.nps.gov/natr/learn/historyculture/choctaw.htm.
Shiro, Robert. “." Vietnam War Reference Library. . Encyclopedia.com. 2 Aug. 2022 .” Encyclopedia.com. Encyclopedia.com, August 12, 2020. https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/wars-effect-vietnamese-land-and-people.
Thompson, Emma K. “Hawaiian Monarchy Overthrown; Territory of Hawaii.” Nisei Veterans Legacy, 2014. https://www.nvlchawaii.org/hawaiian-monarchy-overthrown-territory-hawaii.
Travis, Yelena. “Native North Americans.” The National Archives. The National Archives, August 17, 2021. https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/education/resources/native-north-americans/#:~:text=The%20first%20permanent%20English%20settlement,see%20what%20they%20could%20gain. 

